---
title: "Safety First"
categories:
    - Design
tags:
    - Safety
    - Top-level design
excerpt: "An overview of safety and how I think I'll apply it."
published: true
modified: 2016-06-25
---

You might argue that as a type of Nerf gun, safety needn't be much of a concern. Perhaps, but I have two reasons for putting a lot of effort into safety:

1. As an educational aid, I want to be able to demonstrate this safely in schools
2. As a demonstration of modern systems engineering, an integrated safety system is a good example

## Safety philosophy

The system should be inherently safe. In its unpowered state, it should not be hazardous. [Inherent safety](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inherent_safety) focuses minimising the consequences of hazards as much as minimising the likelihood of the hazards occurring.

Taking a laser as an example, it would be advantageous to use a relatively high power laser to shine on the target to make it easier to be detected by the target tracking system. However, a bright laser could be harmful to eyes. It might be possible to use interlocks to prevent the firing of the laser if there is a person in the way, but the system would be more inherently safe if the laser was eye safe. In this case, even if the interlocks failed and the laser shone into someone's eye, no damage could be caused.

In some cases it might not be possible to remove a hazard. The idea of removing the gun component from a gun system is not feasible, for example. In these cases the hazard will have to be mitigated. Mitigation can be achieved through design and through procedure. Design will focus on using features such as [interlocks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interlock_(engineering)) and [dead man's switches](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_man%27s_switch), whilst procedural mitigation is achieved by instructions and briefing.

## Hazard identification

Once the design concept is established, it should be possible to identify the hazards and mitigate them as much as possible. Based on my current thoughts about the design, there are two main areas of concern:

1. A Nerf gun with a high rate of fire
2. A laser

In addition, the system is likely to contain moving parts, low voltage electronics and motors and batteries.

## Safety design

The system will be designed so that there are three distinct states:

1. Safe, when power is only applied to non-hazardous components, such as booting a Raspberry Pi
2. Standby, when power is available to servos and some motors
3. Armed, when the laser and gun firing mechanisms are enabled

The three states should be clearly identifiable, by using warning lights for example. There should be a clear sequence of switching to go through in order to get from safe to armed. Included in the switching should be a system of interlocks, so that it isn't possible to end up in an armed state unless it is safe to do so. Additionally, breaking an interlock, losing power or any other unexpected event should reset the system. In other words it shouldn't be possible to switch on the system into an armed state just because a switch was not correctly turned off.

The design should effectively consist of a series of switches and LEDs. To make the system a more obvious one, I'd like to use some noisy relays and bright LED matrices to show the state change as clearly as possible and hopefully add a bit of interest.
