---
title: "Latest Developments: Ammunition and Feed Considerations"
categories:
    - Design
tags:
    - Top-level design
    - Nerf Rival
    - Ammunition Feed
excerpt: "Thoughts about ammunition feed to achieve high rates of fire."
published: true
modified: 2017-02-11
---

It's been a bit of a slow few weeks as far as this project goes. However, whilst development of the design hasn't progressed as much as I would have liked, I have found some interesting work that other people have done, and these should help me with my design.

## A key challenge

Among the many challenges I've set myself, getting a high rate of fire has been one of the more important, and also the one with the most unknowns. It is important because the system needs to offset the unavoidable inaccuracies in targeting. In theory, it should be possible to identify and track a target, generate information about its position in space, its velocity and, from that information, generate a firing solution that means a single projectile will intercept that target. In reality, there are problems:

* Generating range information over short distances is hard
* Generating high frequency position information could be expensive
* Achieving precise motion from all components is probably unlikely for a homemade device
* Accurate ballistics from low speed foam darts is not likely

## Increasing the rate of fire

Most of these problems can be addressed by anticipating an imperfect interception attempt and increasing the likelihood of hitting the target by putting more projectiles into the air. So, rather than calculating the lead required based on your best calculation of the target direction and speed, firing one dart and missing due to one of the many variables being wrong, you fire three darts. The three darts introduce their own variables of course, but if you're approximately right, you increase the chance that one of them hits. Increase the number of darts further, and again you increase your chances. If you watch footage of a [Phalanx](https://youtu.be/cgpQBZF2sZQ) firing, you see an incredibly high rate of fire. One or two rounds on target will be sufficient to destroy the target, but the density of rounds in the air maximises the chance that you achieve those hits.

## Propulsion options

I started this project expecting to use flywheels for propelling darts. To me, this seemed to be the best way to decouple the feed mechanism from the propulsion; the flywheels could spin whilst waiting for a dart. Other mechanisms considered include a spring/piston arrangement. This always seemed to be complicated in comparison to the flywheels, especially when my goal was a high rate of fire. It has been done though, as [this video](https://youtu.be/dokbdPPqkFU?t=1m26s) shows.

Another option I considered briefly, before returning to the flywheel idea, was the use of an external supply of compressed air. Rather than compressing a spring to power a piston on each firing cycle, a solenoid valve could be used to fire each dart. It does seem like a promising option to explore, but for the project at this stage I'd like to supply only electricity to the system.

## Ammunition and feed

When wondering how fast flywheel-based Nerf guns could be fired, I found some information about the [Nerf Rival](http://www.hasbro.com/en-gb/brands/nerfrival) (in particular the electric Zeus blaster). This system uses foam balls instead of darts. Researching further, I found some very promising ideas that used these balls with flywheels and achieved a high rate of fire.

Darts are the most common ammunition used in Nerf guns, and I'd assumed I'd use them. One problem with darts, however, is that it's necessary to feed them in the right orientation. Obviously this is a common feature of most guns, but it was giving me a headache about how to achieve it in my design. For this, I assumed I'd use some sort of belt or track for the darts to move into the gun, before some sort of ram pushed each dart into the flywheels. To achieve this would require synchronised motion of dart feed and ram operation. It should be possible, but I wasn't certain how I would do it.

The big advantage of balls is that it doesn't matter which orientation they are in. Paintball and airsoft guns fire balls, and you can effectively feed them straight from a hopper into the breech of the gun. The Nerf Rival Zeus does this all in line with the barrel. A cylindrical magazine of balls is spring loaded, and a detent holds the ball back from the flywheels. Once the detent is released, the ball is pushed by the spring into the flywheels, which accelerate it out of the gun. The possibilities of this type of system became very apparent when I saw a video from [The Dart Zone](http://torukmakto4.blogspot.co.uk/2015/08/nerf-rival-zeus-lightning-link-rs390.html), which has covered the internals of the Nerf Rival Zeus in detail:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/O1VyA8R-e5M" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Further inspiration comes from [Outof Darts](https://www.youtube.com/c/outofdarts), where the standard magazine was expanded and balls fed using a fan blower:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/XFfwXsr48kM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Summary

As a result of this research, I'm continuing to use the flywheel propulsion mechanism, but will switch to balls instead of darts. The fan-based feed system seems interesting, but I'll keep looking to see if any other options are possible.